1. Project Outline
The project deals with constructing a Cafeteria in Surajmal Vihar, New Delhi.The name of cafeteria would be “CAVENTER’S”. The objective is to launch this project within a time frame of 60 days and the budget allocated for the project is Rs 20, 00,000.  A project team, consisting of 7 members, including a project manager, would be constituted. Each team member would be assigned a functional department of the project, for which, he would be the sole in-charge and who would, in turn, report to the project manager. It would be the role of the project manager to collaborate with all the functional heads harmoniously and ensure smooth functioning of the project.


2.	Project Objective
The main objective of the cafeteria is to ensure quality food to the people living nearby. It will comprise of a variety of cuisines for the people to chose from .
The project manager has been provided an area of 1600 sq ft and his job to realize the goal of establishment of the cafeteria. The time frame given to him is 60 days, with optimal usage of resources and keeping the budget constraint of Rs 20, 00,000 in mind. 

2.1 Project Life Cycle
According to client specifications, the project manager defined a life-cycle of the project, after consulting with the planning department of his project team.
 



Slow beginning
A team is formulated, led by a project manager. Departmental heads are assigned their responsibilities. A brain-storming process among the team members helps to come up with a feasible plan to proceed with the project. No on-field work will take place at this stage.
Buildup of size
This stage includes modeling, planning, estimation, resource acquisition and allocation. All the basic requirements are taken care of and the project is ready to be implemented.
Peak
This is the most crucial and longest stage of the project when all major activities are in full progress, including construction, electrical, plumbing, whitewash, furnishing and interior activities of the cafeteria. It covers organization control, leadership and decision making. Many conflicts and unforeseen issues may arise which must be solved by the project manager. Also, quality control is an important aspect at this stage.
Decline
The performance level of the employees decreases when the project nears completion. Quality control is of prime importance and the project manger must ensure that his team works efficiently even during the last stages of the project. A regular assessment by senior management is carried out to check for any shortcomings in the project.
Termination
This is the wrapping up stage which includes review of process and outcomes. When the senior management is satisfied with the final outcome of all departments and their requirement is met, the project is said to be completed. 


1.2	Project Goal Trade-Offs


LIFE CYCLE STAGE	COST	SCHEDULE	PERFORMANCE
Slow Beginning	1	1	1
Buildup	2	1	2
Main	2	1	1
Phase-out	3	2	1

[NOTE: 1= Most important            2= Important             3= Least important]

The given table illustrates the importance of cost, schedule and performance during the various stages of the project. All three factors play a major role in the initial planning and designing of the project. However, the significance of cost factor decreases as the project progresses further. Sticking to the schedule is very important throughout the life of the project in order to meet the client’s demands on time. The performance level defines the quality of work done and is of crucial during the ‘do-it’ stage, where the project is at its peak.





3.	Project Planning
3.1 Project Team
The project will call for an Initial Launch Meeting to formulate a dynamic project team and orient all the team members towards their goal of establishment of the cafeteria. The services of a skilled and experienced project manager would be hired by the company. Seven department heads will be appointed from within the company, in accordance with the requirements of the project: Finance manager, Engineering manager, Quality control manager and a Junior manager who is further in-charge of Inventory manager and a Complaint manager. 
 
Fig: Flowchart Representing Project Team
Owner: It plays a vital role in the investment and defining of project objective. The senior management also plays a role in approval after each major activity so that the project manager can proceed ahead with the plan. Project manager keeps the owner updated on the developments of the project.
Project manager: He is the head of the project. All the department heads directly report to him. In turn, his job is to satisfy his client and incorporate any changes that the management asks for.
Engineering manager: Accountable for construction, electrical, plumbing, furnishing and interiors of the centre.
Finance manager: Deal with the overall financial transactions of the project.
Junior manager: Involved with project planning and conceptualization. Inventory manager and complaint manager report to him directly.
Complaint manager: Takes care of the grievances of the cafeteria staff and the students.
Inventory manager: Maintenance and monitoring of the purchase and storage of the inventory in the procurement department.
Quality Control manager: Conducts regular quality checks and control after accomplishment of each activity. He will monitor and ensure that the quality of work is up to the defined standards.
After the initial launch meeting, a composite plan is made in which the responsibilities of each department are clearly chalked out and discussed with the corresponding department heads. Each department head gives the estimated budget, schedules and description of the sub tasks. After the composite plan is approved by the project manager and senior management, the master plan is established. A post planning review is held to ensure that all the necessary elements of the project plan have been properly developed and communicated to the concerned departments.





3.2 Work Break Down Structure
The work break down structure highlights the sequential flow of activities being carried out to achieve the prime objective of the project.

  
A detailed description of the activities being carried out during the life of project 

1.)	ESTABLISHMENT OF CAFETERIA

1.1) CONSTRUCTION WORK AT THE CENTRE
 1.1.1) Deal with Architect- An agreement will be signed by the project manager with an experienced architect to take over the activity of construction work at the centre. This contract will be finalized after the acceptance from the Senior Management of company who will provide an area of 1600 sq feet for this project.
1.1.2) Architect designs framework: The architect will make a design according to the necessities at the centre. This plan must be approved by the project manager followed by the Senior Management of the company. 
1.1.3) Tie-up with Contractor: The project manager will now fix a deal with a contractor for the execution of his plan. This contractor along with his team will carry out the work of construction at the centre.
 1.1.4) Purchase of building materials by Contractor: All raw materials as well as the inventory required for the work to be done will be bought by the contractor. He will be paid accordingly for the labor charges and cost of materials bought as well. 
1.1.5)  Quality check: As part of an evaluation and monitoring procedure, a quality check will be conducted to check the quality of materials bought and even after completion of final work. 
 1.1.6)  Final approval by Project Manger and Sr. management: This initial phase of the project once over will be scrutinized by the project manager to check for any deviations, followed by approval from the Senior Management of the company. 


1.2)  PLUMBING
 1.2.1) Deal with Plumber: A contract will be fixed with a plumber to carry out the plumbing activity at the centre inclusive of fitting of pipelines, taps, water connections etc.
 1.2.2)  Inventory purchase by Plumber: All the materials for this activity will be purchased by the plumber as per the requirements. The quality will be approved by the QC manager and the expenses incurred will be taken care of by the Finance manager.
 1.2.3) Plumbing work commences: The plumbing work by the plumber and his co-workers will begin as soon as the inventory required is purchased.
 1.2.4)  Quality check: A quality evaluation of the materials bought by the plumber and the work the plumbing team carries out will be done to ensure meeting of the desired standards.
 1.2.5)  Final approval by PM: Completion of this task will be finally given consent by the project manager.

1.3)  ELECTRICAL WORK
 1.3.1)  Deal with Electrician: A deal will be finalized with an electrician to carry out the entire work of electrical wiring and fittings at the centre.
 1.3.2)  Inventory purchase by Electrician: All materials like wirings, switches ,fans ,ACs etc. required for this activity will be purchased by the electrician as per his needs.  
 1.3.3)  Wiring work commences: The electrician along with his team of workers will start the task of electrical wiring as well as all the fitting of appliances.
 1.3.4) Purchase of electrical appliances: All materials including tube lights, fans, air conditioners, RO system, refrigerators, coffee machines etc. will be bought under the charge of Inventory Manager by his team of workers.  
 1.3.5)  Electrical fitting work: The electrical appliances will be installed and fixed by the team of electrician and his co-workers as per the plan at all required places.
 1.3.6)  Quality check: The quality of work will be checked by the QC department in order to meet the standards. The quality will be checked in two terms – materials bought by electrician as well as the team of inventory manager and of the work done.
 1.3.7)  Final approval by PM: A final clearance will be given by the project manager after the assessment of each and every activity carried out under this task of electrical fittings.

1.4) WHITEWASH
 1.4.1) Deal with Painter: An agreement will be fixed with a painter to carry out the work of whitewashing of walls and ceilings at the centre subsequent to the work of plumbing and electrical fittings.
 1.4.2) Inventory purchase by Painter: The painter along with his team of workers will purchase the list of items required as per his needs and get the quality approved by the Quality Control department prior to the start of whitewashing.
 1.4.3) Whitewash & painting commences: The work of whitewash will begin after the approval of material bought by the QC department. This includes whitewash of ceiling and all walls of the centre.
 1.4.4)  Quality check: The quality of work will be assessed at each stage of this task. This work will be done under the charge of QC Manager.
 1.4.5) Final approval by PM: The work once completed will be a given an approval by the project manager after his full satisfaction.

1.5)  FURNISHINGS AND INTERIORS
 1.5.1) Deal with agent for Furnishing & Interior Designer: A deal will be fixed with an agency that carries the work of furnishing and also with an interior designer to look after the interiors of the centre and give a finishing touch to the structure.
 1.5.2) Inventory purchase by agency: All furnishing requirements like sofa, chairs, tables etc will be bought or made by this agency under the vigilance of the QC department of the project team.
 1.5.3)  Furnishing work commences: All the furniture as well as other items will be laid down as per the plan. 
 1.5.4)  Start of interiors: Following the furnishing work, the interiors at the centre will be done mainly to beautify the place and give it a final touch. This would include putting paintings on wall, placing decorative items, plants etc.
 1.5.5) Quality check: The inspection of all activities carried for both these tasks will be monitored to guarantee high standards in the work done.
 1.5.6)  Final approval by PM: The work once accomplished will be given a clearance by the project manager when done up to his expectations.

3.3 Responsibility Matrix
Responsibility matrix is a visual representation of the tasks assigned to different functional heads in a project team. These individuals are responsible for any issues, major or minor, that crop up during the course of this project. They are to be constantly updated with the progress of their department.  This concept clarifies the nature of the work of each individual in the project team, according to their designations.
According to the nature of work in the project, there are some sub-functional levels under these functional heads too.  Since this project is inter-departmental, such a matrix makes it easier for each member of the team to identify the task assigned to him. For each task, it is clearly demarcated as to who holds the core responsibility, who must be contacted in case of any changes in the preplanned estimates and who is responsible for the final approval of the task. Generally, the final approval is of the project manager and the senior management.
The responsibility matrix is as follows:
Responsibility/ Task

	
Deal with architect+ plumber+electrician+ furnishings agent+ interior designer	Approval of framework designed by architect	Purchase of inventory	Construction work at the centre	Plumbing+ Electrical fittings+ Whitewash+Furnishing+ Interiors	Purchase of electrical appliances	Quality check at every stage	Approval by senior management
Project Manager	2	1	5	6	6	6	5	1
Jr. Manager	1	4	6	2	2			2
Finance Manager	4		3			1		
Complaint Manager	3							
Engineering Manager		3		1	1	2	2	
Quality Control Manager			3	3	3	3	1	
Inventory Manager			1			1		




 
4.	Budgeting and Cost Estimation
4.1	Estimated Budget
ACTIVITY	COST	ESTIMATED  COST (Rs)
Construction work of centre	Rs 220 per sq ft * 1200 sq ft	2, 40,000
Plumbing	Rs 5,000	5, 000
Electrical wiring & fitting	Rs 25,000	25,000
Whitewash	Rs 10,000	10,000
Purchase of electrical inventory		
Air conditioners 	Rs. 50,000 	40,000
Tube lights	10 pcs. * Rs 200 per pc.	1,500
Fans	6 pcs. * Rs 1,500 per pc.	8,000
RO water purifier	1 pcs.* Rs 10,000 per pc.	10,500
Miscellaneous	Rs 51, 000	50,000
Total of electrical inventory		1, 21,500
Furnishing	Rs 40, 000	40,000
Interiors	Rs 15, 000	20, 000
Project manager’s salary	Rs 50, 000	50, 000
Miscellaneous	Rs 60,000	50,000
		
TOTAL		5, 91, 000
		

















4.1 Cost Estimation Method
An iterative budgeting process was adopted, in which, both the senior management and their subordinates were allowed to put forward their requirements and come to a mutual conclusion. 
Initially, the senior management made use of their position and experience and decided to grant a budget of Rs 5.5 lakhs for the project. The project manager, along with the functional heads, made some rough estimates according to the requirements of his client and the necessities of the project. They came up with a proposal that demanded a budget of Rs 7 lakhs. Discussions between both parties ensued where the project manager tried to convince the senior management of the company to increase their budget keeping in mind the realistic problems that are faced while working and finally, the senior management relented and agreed to provide a total budget of Rs 6 lakhs and the project manager agreed to cut some surplus costs that his team had overestimated keeping an overly optimistic view. The process of iterative budgeting did consume time but the ultimate outcome was up to satisfaction of both the parties.
The project manager then had detailed discussions with his subordinates. All the department heads came up with their requirements and presented precise estimates of their respective departments. Negotiations followed and eventually, the project manager allocated a sum of Rs 5.91 lakhs, with a specific amount allocated to each vertical of the project. The remaining Rs 9000 was kept as an extra amount as a part of the contingency plan. Therefore, the final cost of the project did not go overboard and the project manager satisfactorily met his clients’ demands in terms of cost.






5.	Scheduling
Scheduling is a technique to portray a network of activities and events’ sequential relationships graphically among the activities in the project. Tasks that must precede or follow other tasks are clearly identified by this technique.
A fixed time of 60 days was given to the project manager for the completion of the establishment of Cafeteria. The Project Manager estimated the time period of the project to be 58 days by designing a PERT network diagram and identified the critical path from it. Critical path on activity on node (AON) network signifies the activities/ tasks which, if delayed, will delay the completion of the project.
5.1 Activity Description










 
5.2 Activity Diagram
ACTIVITY ON NODE (AON)
           
ACTIVITY
	           
PRECEDENCE	        
TIME (DAYS)
A
	---	20
B
	A	3
C
	B	3
D
	C	8
E
	A	2
F
	D, E	2
G
	F	20
H
	F	10
I
	---	20
		

5.3 PERT/CPM ANALYSIS
0              0
0              0

0      20
0     20
20  23
32  34
20   22
20    23
23    26
23     26
26     34
26   34
34    36
  34     36
   36      56

  36     46

 36     56
    46     56
   0     20
36    56
56       58
56    58
58           58
58           58

















5.4 Resource Allocation
Resource allocation is a way to assign the available resources in an economic way in a project. It is the scheduling of activities and the resources required by those activities while taking into consideration the resource availability, cost, time and performance. A project manager always strives for excellence to achieve successful completion of the project.
The initial cost of Rs 6 lakhs and a time period of 60 days were given for the establishment of Cafeteria. The project manager, after estimating the cost and schedule would be completing the project in 58 days within the budget of Rs 5.91 lakhs. If a scope creep occurs and the senior management demands for project completion in 55 days then crashing will have to be done to reduce the time by 3 days. This reduction in time will lead to an escalation in the estimated cost of the project by Rs 9000.  
In response to this demand by the owners of the company, the project manager tries to find the activities that could be crashed in the most economical manner. All activities on the critical path are taken into consideration and the corresponding assessment is done to calculate the crash cost per day. Using this data along with the concept of partial crashing, activity A and D are found as the most appropriate activities to be crashed. Crashing of these two activities will help the project team to carry out the project in the most economical way.
Hence, the overall effect of crashing on the establishment of the cafeteria would lead to the completion of the project within the limits of the budget and time constraints provided by the company.



 
5.5 Concept of Crashing

CRASHING OF ACTIVITIES


Activity
	
Normal Time (Days)
	
Crash Time (Days)	
Normal Cost (Rs)	
Crash Cost (Rs)	Partial crashing allowed	
Crash Cost per Day (Rs)

Construction work of structure	20	18	2,64,000	2,72,000	Yes	4,000

Plumbing
	3	3	50,000	50,000	No	---
Electrical wiring and fitting	3	3	65,000	65,000	No	---

Whitewash
	8	7	10,000	11,000	Yes	1000
Purchase of electrical inventory	2	2	2,58,500	2,58,500	No	---

Furnishing
	20	20	2,80,000	2,80,000	No	---

Interiors
	10	10	3,20,000	3,20,000	No	---

Total incremental cost = Rs (4000*2) + Rs 1000 = Rs 9000
Total cost of project before crashing: Rs 5,91, 000
Total cost of project after crashing: Rs 6, 00,000
6.	Project Monitoring And Control 
A project management plan is incomplete without the aspect of project control. This is mainly because in the absence of a continuous monitoring and control process, the chance of project failure increases due to unnoticed deviations. It is rightly said “Earlier a problem is disclosed; the easier it is to manage” as when project problems are hidden from the project manager by his team members they often grow to the point where they become difficult to be defended or handled.
In reference to this, three types of project control mechanisms have been devised namely- Post Control, Go/ No-Go control and Cybernetics control. In the project of “Establishment of Cafeteria”, the ‘Go/No-Go Control’ technique is applied. 
Go/ No-Go control simply refers to an opportunity to decide whether to or not to proceed after each and every milestone event. This type of measurement tells the reviewer if the object’s dimensions are within the set limits or whether there are deviations that need a consideration. This monitoring method helps the project manager as well as the senior management to decide whether they should bring a change, continue with the planned processes or bring about a termination of an activity or the entire project subjected to the severity of the deviation. This decision is a major landmark at every stage as it indicates a transition from the planning to the phase of accomplishment. The advantage of this mechanism is that it is applicable to every aspect of the project and the milestone events that are the key events which would help in controlling the ongoing activities. Hence, we can say this technique is a form of a test to see that if some specific precondition has been met. Based on this, if the risk condition is absent, a green signal of ‘go’ is given whereas in presence of a risk condition a ‘no-go’ decision is made and the corresponding risk response plan is implemented. 
The work breakdown structure of our project indicates that a continuous monitoring and control mechanism is being applied. There exists a quality check after each and every activity that ensures that each activity is done to its perfection and if it all any deviations arise; a proper risk response plan is implemented. The charge of this will be under the Quality Control manager who will devise all risk response plans and make a decision whether to go/ no-go in every condition along with the project manager and the senior management. This decision will be based on certain parameters designed by the QC manager that will put to test the gravity of deviation and their effect on the three basic elements- time, cost and performance. Hence, the entire team makes a decision that with the existing deviations whether the gates for the next activity must be opened or not. 






 
Conclusion
The budget allocated for the establishment of Cafeteria was of Rs 20 lakhs, to be completed within a time frame of 60 days. According to the requirements of the senior management, the project manager formulated a skilled project team. With the assistance of his team members, the project manager designed the entire project plan and assigned the respective responsibilities among the functional heads. His estimations projected that the project would take 58 days for completion, with a predicted budget of Rs 19.91 lakhs. This amount included all possible expenditure on the construction material, as well as a miscellaneous amount of Rs 1 lakh, in case of underestimation. Even after including all possible costs, the project manager was left with a sum of Rs 9000, which he kept aside as a part of contingency plan. 
In a scenario where the senior management decides to accelerate the process and shortens the duration of the project to 55 days, an escalation in cost is seen. Two activities were crashed by 3 days and the total crashing cost was expected to be Rs 9000. The total cost incurred then summed up to be Rs 20 lakh, which is the exact amount which was offered initially by the management. Therefore, it is safe to assume that under no circumstances does the project exceed its allotted budget. 
The performance aspect of the project is overlooked by the quality control department and there is a continuous monitoring at each stage of the project. If at any point, the actual figures do not match the predicted estimations or if there is a serious glitch somewhere in any process, the project manager decides whether to go ahead with the outcome or re-do the whole thing. Quality perspective is not to be compromised at any stage.
A successful project is one which strikes the right balance between the three pillars of performance, cost and time. The present projections indicate that all these aspects have been suitably addressed and the project is ready to progress to the implementation stage.
 

